docs/content/docs/guides/configuration.mdx, before:

---
title: Configuration
description: Complete configuration reference for nestjs-openapi-static
---

All configuration is done through a TypeScript config file (typically `openapi.config.ts`). Use the `defineConfig` helper for type safety.

## Config File Structure

```ts twoslash
import { defineConfig } from 'nestjs-openapi-static';

export default defineConfig({
  // Where to write the spec (required)
  output: 'openapi.json',

  // Output format
  format: 'json',

  // Input file configuration
  files: {
    entry: 'src/app.module.ts',
  },

  // OpenAPI metadata
  openapi: {
    info: { title: 'My API', version: '1.0.0' },
  },

  // Generation options
  options: {
    basePath: '/api',
  },
});
```

## `output` (required)

Path to write the generated specification. Relative to the config file.

```typescript
output: 'src/openapi/spec.json';
```

## `format`

Output format for the specification.

| Value    | Description                   |
| -------- | ----------------------------- |
| `'json'` | JSON format (default)         |
| `'yaml'` | YAML format (fully supported) |

## `files`

Input file configuration. All paths are relative to the config file location.

```typescript
files: {
   // Entry module file(s) - default: 'src/app.module.ts'
   entry: 'src/app.module.ts',

   // Multiple entry points (only the first is used today)
   entry: ['src/app.module.ts', 'src/admin.module.ts'],

   // tsconfig path (recommended)
   tsconfig: 'tsconfig.json',

  // Glob pattern(s) for DTO files
  dtoGlob: 'src/**/*.dto.ts',

  // Multiple DTO patterns
  dtoGlob: ['src/**/*.dto.ts', 'libs/**/*.dto.ts'],

  // Glob patterns to include
  include: ['src/**/*.ts'],

  // Glob patterns to exclude (defaults shown)
  exclude: ['**/*.spec.ts', '**/*.test.ts', '**/node_modules/**'],
}
```

Set `tsconfig` explicitly. The Promise-based generator will search upward from `files.entry` if omitted, but the Effect-based API requires a path.

### Entry Points

The `entry` option specifies which module file to analyze. The library traverses `@Module({ imports })` to discover all controllers.

```typescript
// Single entry point
entry: 'src/app.module.ts';

// Multiple entry points (first entry is used today)
entry: ['apps/api/src/app.module.ts', 'apps/admin/src/app.module.ts'];
```

<Callout type="warn">
  Multi-entry configs are normalized but the current generator only reads the
  first entry. Provide separate configs per app if you need multiple specs.
</Callout>

### DTO Glob

The `dtoGlob` option specifies which files contain DTOs for schema generation. Only exported types are converted into schemas.

```typescript
// Single pattern
dtoGlob: 'src/**/*.dto.ts';

// Multiple patterns
dtoGlob: ['src/**/*.dto.ts', 'src/**/*.entity.ts'];
```

## `openapi`

OpenAPI specification metadata. Maps directly to the OpenAPI 3.0 spec structure.

### `info` (required)

API metadata for the `info` section:

```typescript
openapi: {
  info: {
    title: 'My API',           // required
    version: '1.0.0',          // required
    description: 'API for managing resources',
    contact: {
      name: 'API Support',
      email: 'support@example.com',
      url: 'https://support.example.com',
    },
    license: {
      name: 'MIT',
      url: 'https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT',
    },
  },
}
```

### `servers`

Server URLs for the API:

```typescript
openapi: {
  servers: [
    { url: 'https://api.example.com', description: 'Production' },
    { url: 'https://staging-api.example.com', description: 'Staging' },
    { url: 'http://localhost:3000', description: 'Development' },
  ],
}
```

### `tags`

Tags for organizing API endpoints:

```typescript
openapi: {
  tags: [
    { name: 'users', description: 'User management' },
    { name: 'posts', description: 'Blog post operations' },
    { name: 'auth', description: 'Authentication' },
  ],
}
```

### `security`

Security schemes and global requirements. See the [Security Guide](/docs/guides/security) for details.

```typescript
openapi: {
  security: {
    schemes: [
      {
        name: 'bearerAuth',
        type: 'http',
        scheme: 'bearer',
        bearerFormat: 'JWT',
      },
    ],
    global: [{ bearerAuth: [] }],
  },
}
```

## `options`

Generation behavior options.

### `basePath`

Global prefix for all routes. Equivalent to NestJS's `app.setGlobalPrefix()`:

```typescript
options: {
  basePath: '/api/v1',
}
```

With this configuration, a route `GET /users` becomes `GET /api/v1/users`.

### `extractValidation`

Extract validation constraints from class-validator decorators (default: `true`):

```typescript
options: {
  extractValidation: true,
}
```

See the [Validation Guide](/docs/guides/validation) for details.

### `excludeDecorators`

Decorator names that exclude endpoints from the spec:

```typescript
options: {
  // Default values
  excludeDecorators: ['ApiExcludeEndpoint', 'ApiExcludeController'],

  // Add custom decorators
  excludeDecorators: ['ApiExcludeEndpoint', 'Internal', 'AdminOnly'],
}
```

### `pathFilter`

Filter paths by regex or predicate function. Paths matching the regex (or returning `true`) are **included**:

```typescript
options: {
  // Exclude paths containing '/internal/'
  pathFilter: /^(?!.*\/internal\/).*/,

  // Using a function
  pathFilter: (path) => !path.includes('/internal/'),

  // Include only v2 API paths
  pathFilter: /^\/api\/v2\//,
}
```

## `extends`

The type definition includes an `extends` field for future shared configs, but it is **not implemented** in the current Promise-based generator. Keep configs standalone for now.

## Complete Example

```ts twoslash
import { defineConfig } from 'nestjs-openapi-static';

export default defineConfig({
  output: 'src/openapi/openapi.generated.json',
  format: 'json',

  files: {
    entry: 'src/app.module.ts',
    tsconfig: 'tsconfig.json',
    dtoGlob: 'src/**/*.dto.ts',
    exclude: ['**/*.spec.ts', '**/*.test.ts'],
  },

  openapi: {
    info: {
      title: 'Todo API',
      version: '1.0.0',
      description: 'A simple todo management API',
      contact: {
        name: 'API Support',
        email: 'support@example.com',
      },
      license: {
        name: 'MIT',
      },
    },
    servers: [
      { url: 'https://api.todo.example.com', description: 'Production' },
      { url: 'http://localhost:3000', description: 'Development' },
    ],
    tags: [
      { name: 'todos', description: 'Todo operations' },
      { name: 'users', description: 'User management' },
    ],
    security: {
      schemes: [
        {
          name: 'bearerAuth',
          type: 'http',
          scheme: 'bearer',
          bearerFormat: 'JWT',
        },
      ],
      global: [{ bearerAuth: [] }],
    },
  },

  options: {
    basePath: '/api/v1',
    extractValidation: true,
    excludeDecorators: ['ApiExcludeEndpoint', 'Internal'],
    pathFilter: /^(?!.*\/internal\/).*/,
  },
});
```

## Next Steps

- [Decorators Guide](/docs/guides/decorators) - Supported NestJS and Swagger decorators
- [Security Guide](/docs/guides/security) - Configure authentication schemes
- [Validation Guide](/docs/guides/validation) - Extract class-validator constraints

Commit message:

FEAT feat: add zero-config schema resolution with hybrid type discovery
- Introduced hybrid resolution that auto-discovers missing schemas when $refs are detected
- Added spec validation API (validateSpec, formatValidationResult, categorizeBrokenRefs) to detect broken $refs
- Implemented type resolver with import alias and built-in type handling (Array<T>, Record, Partial, etc.)
- Added benchmark workflow and scripts for performance tracking on PRs
- Extended GenerateResult with validation field; CLI now prints warnings for broken refs
- Added import-alias e2e test suite and builtin-types controller test coverage

Zero-config discovery eliminates manual dtoGlob maintenance in large monorepos. Hybrid resolution scans for missing types only when needed, avoiding full-project scans upfront. This improves performance and developer experience while ensuring complete schema coverage. Validation warnings help diagnose configuration gaps without blocking generation.

docs/content/docs/guides/configuration.mdx, after:

---
title: Configuration
description: Complete configuration reference for nestjs-openapi-static
---

All configuration is done through a TypeScript config file (typically `openapi.config.ts`). Use the `defineConfig` helper for type safety.

## Config File Structure

```ts twoslash
import { defineConfig } from 'nestjs-openapi-static';

export default defineConfig({
  // Where to write the spec (required)
  output: 'openapi.json',

  // Output format
  format: 'json',

  // Input file configuration
  files: {
    entry: 'src/app.module.ts',
  },

  // OpenAPI metadata
  openapi: {
    info: { title: 'My API', version: '1.0.0' },
  },

  // Generation options
  options: {
    basePath: '/api',
  },
});
```

## `output` (required)

Path to write the generated specification. Relative to the config file.

```typescript
output: 'src/openapi/spec.json';
```

## `format`

Output format for the specification.

| Value    | Description                   |
| -------- | ----------------------------- |
| `'json'` | JSON format (default)         |
| `'yaml'` | YAML format (fully supported) |

## `files`

Input file configuration. All paths are relative to the config file location.

```typescript
files: {
   // Entry module file(s) - default: 'src/app.module.ts'
   entry: 'src/app.module.ts',

   // Multiple entry points (only the first is used today)
   entry: ['src/app.module.ts', 'src/admin.module.ts'],

   // tsconfig path (recommended)
   tsconfig: 'tsconfig.json',

  // Glob pattern(s) for DTO files
  dtoGlob: 'src/**/*.dto.ts',

  // Multiple DTO patterns
  dtoGlob: ['src/**/*.dto.ts', 'libs/**/*.dto.ts'],

  // Glob patterns to include
  include: ['src/**/*.ts'],

  // Glob patterns to exclude (defaults shown)
  exclude: ['**/*.spec.ts', '**/*.test.ts', '**/node_modules/**'],
}
```

Set `tsconfig` explicitly. The Promise-based generator will search upward from `files.entry` if omitted, but the Effect-based API requires a path.

### Entry Points

The `entry` option specifies which module file to analyze. The library traverses `@Module({ imports })` to discover all controllers.

```typescript
// Single entry point
entry: 'src/app.module.ts';

// Multiple entry points (first entry is used today)
entry: ['apps/api/src/app.module.ts', 'apps/admin/src/app.module.ts'];
```

<Callout type="warn">
  Multi-entry configs are normalized but the current generator only reads the
  first entry. Provide separate configs per app if you need multiple specs.
</Callout>

### DTO Glob

The `dtoGlob` option specifies which files contain DTOs for schema generation. Only exported types are converted into schemas.

```typescript
// Single pattern
dtoGlob: 'src/**/*.dto.ts';

// Multiple patterns
dtoGlob: ['src/**/*.dto.ts', 'src/**/*.entity.ts'];
```

Common patterns include `**/*.dto.ts`, `**/*.entity.ts`, `**/*.model.ts`, and
`**/*.schema.ts`.

When a schema ref appears in paths but isn't generated from your globs, the
generator tries to resolve the missing type by scanning for exported types and
merges any additional schemas it finds. Keep `dtoGlob` focused for performance,
and expand it if you still see broken ref warnings.

<Callout type="note">
  The CLI prints a broken refs warning if any `$ref`s are missing. Use that list
  to adjust `dtoGlob` coverage.
</Callout>

## `openapi`

OpenAPI specification metadata. Maps directly to the OpenAPI 3.0 spec structure.

### `info` (required)

API metadata for the `info` section:

```typescript
openapi: {
  info: {
    title: 'My API',           // required
    version: '1.0.0',          // required
    description: 'API for managing resources',
    contact: {
      name: 'API Support',
      email: 'support@example.com',
      url: 'https://support.example.com',
    },
    license: {
      name: 'MIT',
      url: 'https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT',
    },
  },
}
```

### `servers`

Server URLs for the API:

```typescript
openapi: {
  servers: [
    { url: 'https://api.example.com', description: 'Production' },
    { url: 'https://staging-api.example.com', description: 'Staging' },
    { url: 'http://localhost:3000', description: 'Development' },
  ],
}
```

### `tags`

Tags for organizing API endpoints:

```typescript
openapi: {
  tags: [
    { name: 'users', description: 'User management' },
    { name: 'posts', description: 'Blog post operations' },
    { name: 'auth', description: 'Authentication' },
  ],
}
```

### `security`

Security schemes and global requirements. See the [Security Guide](/docs/guides/security) for details.

```typescript
openapi: {
  security: {
    schemes: [
      {
        name: 'bearerAuth',
        type: 'http',
        scheme: 'bearer',
        bearerFormat: 'JWT',
      },
    ],
    global: [{ bearerAuth: [] }],
  },
}
```

## `options`

Generation behavior options.

### `basePath`

Global prefix for all routes. Equivalent to NestJS's `app.setGlobalPrefix()`:

```typescript
options: {
  basePath: '/api/v1',
}
```

With this configuration, a route `GET /users` becomes `GET /api/v1/users`.

### `extractValidation`

Extract validation constraints from class-validator decorators (default: `true`):

```typescript
options: {
  extractValidation: true,
}
```

See the [Validation Guide](/docs/guides/validation) for details.

### `excludeDecorators`

Decorator names that exclude endpoints from the spec:

```typescript
options: {
  // Default values
  excludeDecorators: ['ApiExcludeEndpoint', 'ApiExcludeController'],

  // Add custom decorators
  excludeDecorators: ['ApiExcludeEndpoint', 'Internal', 'AdminOnly'],
}
```

### `pathFilter`

Filter paths by regex or predicate function. Paths matching the regex (or returning `true`) are **included**:

```typescript
options: {
  // Exclude paths containing '/internal/'
  pathFilter: /^(?!.*\/internal\/).*/,

  // Using a function
  pathFilter: (path) => !path.includes('/internal/'),

  // Include only v2 API paths
  pathFilter: /^\/api\/v2\//,
}
```

## `extends`

The type definition includes an `extends` field for future shared configs, but it is **not implemented** in the current Promise-based generator. Keep configs standalone for now.

## Complete Example

```ts twoslash
import { defineConfig } from 'nestjs-openapi-static';

export default defineConfig({
  output: 'src/openapi/openapi.generated.json',
  format: 'json',

  files: {
    entry: 'src/app.module.ts',
    tsconfig: 'tsconfig.json',
    dtoGlob: 'src/**/*.dto.ts',
    exclude: ['**/*.spec.ts', '**/*.test.ts'],
  },

  openapi: {
    info: {
      title: 'Todo API',
      version: '1.0.0',
      description: 'A simple todo management API',
      contact: {
        name: 'API Support',
        email: 'support@example.com',
      },
      license: {
        name: 'MIT',
      },
    },
    servers: [
      { url: 'https://api.todo.example.com', description: 'Production' },
      { url: 'http://localhost:3000', description: 'Development' },
    ],
    tags: [
      { name: 'todos', description: 'Todo operations' },
      { name: 'users', description: 'User management' },
    ],
    security: {
      schemes: [
        {
          name: 'bearerAuth',
          type: 'http',
          scheme: 'bearer',
          bearerFormat: 'JWT',
        },
      ],
      global: [{ bearerAuth: [] }],
    },
  },

  options: {
    basePath: '/api/v1',
    extractValidation: true,
    excludeDecorators: ['ApiExcludeEndpoint', 'Internal'],
    pathFilter: /^(?!.*\/internal\/).*/,
  },
});
```

## Next Steps

- [Decorators Guide](/docs/guides/decorators) - Supported NestJS and Swagger decorators
- [Security Guide](/docs/guides/security) - Configure authentication schemes
- [Validation Guide](/docs/guides/validation) - Extract class-validator constraints
