docs/content/docs/guides/decorators.mdx, before:

---
title: Decorators
description: Supported NestJS and Swagger decorators
---

The generator understands a comprehensive set of NestJS + Swagger decorators. Schemas come from TypeScript types (not `@ApiProperty`), and security can be configured via decorators or config.

<Callout>
  Quick truth table: we read routing + method Swagger decorators (tags,
  operation metadata, consumes/produces, ApiResponse), parameter descriptions,
  and exclusion decorators. We ignore property-level Swagger decorators and
  response shortcuts.
</Callout>

## Routing Decorators

### Controller

```typescript
@Controller('users')
export class UsersController {
  // All routes prefixed with /users
}
```

<Callout type="warn">
  Controller versioning (`@Controller({ path: 'users', version: '1' })`) is not
  currently supported. We only read the string path.
</Callout>

### HTTP Method Decorators

All standard HTTP method decorators are supported:

```typescript
@Controller('users')
export class UsersController {
  @Get()
  findAll() {}

  @Get(':id')
  findOne(@Param('id') id: string) {}

  @Post()
  create(@Body() dto: CreateUserDto) {}

  @Put(':id')
  replace(@Param('id') id: string, @Body() dto: UpdateUserDto) {}

  @Patch(':id')
  update(@Param('id') id: string, @Body() dto: PatchUserDto) {}

  @Delete(':id')
  remove(@Param('id') id: string) {}
}
```

### Parameter Decorators

```typescript
@Get(':id')
findOne(
  @Param('id') id: string,                    // Path parameter
  @Query('include') include?: string,         // Query parameter
  @Headers('authorization') auth: string,     // Header parameter
) {}

@Post()
create(
  @Body() dto: CreateUserDto,                 // Request body
) {}
```

### Response Status

```typescript
@Post()
@HttpCode(201)
create(@Body() dto: CreateUserDto) {}

@Delete(':id')
@HttpCode(204)
remove(@Param('id') id: string) {}
```

## Swagger Decorators

### `@ApiTags`

Assigns tags to controller endpoints:

```typescript
@ApiTags('users')
@Controller('users')
export class UsersController {
  // All endpoints tagged with 'users'
}

// Multiple tags
@ApiTags('users', 'admin')
@Controller('admin/users')
export class AdminUsersController {}
```

### `@ApiOperation`

Describes an operation:

```typescript
@Get()
@ApiOperation({
  summary: 'List all users',
  description: 'Returns a paginated list of users',
  operationId: 'listUsers',
  deprecated: false,
})
findAll() {}
```

| Property      | OpenAPI Field |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| `summary`     | `summary`     |
| `description` | `description` |
| `operationId` | `operationId` |
| `deprecated`  | `deprecated`  |

### `@ApiParam`

Documents path parameters:

```typescript
@Get(':id')
@ApiParam({
  name: 'id',
  description: 'User ID',
  type: String,
  required: true,
  example: '123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000',
})
findOne(@Param('id') id: string) {}
```

### `@ApiQuery`

Documents query parameters:

```typescript
@Get()
@ApiQuery({
  name: 'page',
  description: 'Page number',
  type: Number,
  required: false,
  example: 1,
})
@ApiQuery({
  name: 'limit',
  description: 'Items per page',
  type: Number,
  required: false,
  example: 10,
})
findAll(
  @Query('page') page?: number,
  @Query('limit') limit?: number,
) {}
```

### Query DTOs

When using `@Query()` without an explicit parameter name, DTO properties are **inlined as individual query parameters** by default:

```typescript
// DTO definition
class PaginationDto {
  page?: number;
  limit?: number;
}

// Controller
@Get()
findAll(@Query() pagination: PaginationDto) {}

// Generated OpenAPI parameters:
// - page (query, optional)
// - limit (query, optional)
```

This is the standard OpenAPI practice and works better with code generators. If you prefer to keep the DTO as a single schema reference, set `query.style: "ref"` in your config. See the [Configuration Guide](/docs/guides/configuration#query) for details.

<Callout type="note">
  Explicitly named query params like `@Query('filter') filter: FilterDto` always
  use a schema reference, regardless of the `query.style` setting.
</Callout>

### `@ApiBody`

Documents the request body:

```typescript
@Post()
@ApiBody({
  description: 'User creation data',
  type: CreateUserDto,
  required: true,
})
create(@Body() dto: CreateUserDto) {}
```

### `@ApiResponse`

Documents responses. The `status` property is required and we read `description`, `type`, and array forms (`type: [UserDto]`). Shortcut helpers like `@ApiOkResponse` are not read; use `@ApiResponse` directly.

```typescript
@Get(':id')
@ApiResponse({
  status: 200,
  description: 'User found',
  type: UserDto,
})
@ApiResponse({
  status: 404,
  description: 'User not found',
})
findOne(@Param('id') id: string) {}
```

<Callout type="warn">
  The `status` property is required for `@ApiResponse`. Responses without a
  status are ignored.
</Callout>

### Response Shortcuts

<Callout type="warn">
  Response shortcut decorators (`@ApiOkResponse`, `@ApiCreatedResponse`, etc.)
  are **not currently supported**. Use `@ApiResponse` with an explicit `status`
  property instead.
</Callout>

```typescript
// Instead of @ApiOkResponse({ description: 'Success', type: UserDto })
// Use:
@ApiResponse({ status: 200, description: 'Success', type: UserDto })

// Instead of @ApiCreatedResponse({ description: 'Created', type: UserDto })
// Use:
@ApiResponse({ status: 201, description: 'Created', type: UserDto })

// Instead of @ApiNotFoundResponse({ description: 'Not found' })
// Use:
@ApiResponse({ status: 404, description: 'Not found' })
```

### `@ApiConsumes` and `@ApiProduces`

Specify content types:

```typescript
@Post('upload')
@ApiConsumes('multipart/form-data')
uploadFile(@Body() dto: FileUploadDto) {}

@Get('report')
@ApiProduces('application/pdf')
getReport() {}
```

### `@ApiExcludeEndpoint`

Exclude endpoints from the generated spec:

```typescript
@Get('health')
@ApiExcludeEndpoint()
healthCheck() {}
```

This is controlled by the `excludeDecorators` option:

```typescript
// openapi.config.ts
options: {
  excludeDecorators: ['ApiExcludeEndpoint', 'ApiExcludeController'],
}
```

## DTO Schema Generation

<Callout type="info">
  Schemas are generated from **TypeScript types**, not `@nestjs/swagger`
  decorators. The library uses `ts-json-schema-generator` to analyze your DTO
  classes and interfaces.
</Callout>

### How Schemas Work

The library generates JSON Schema definitions by analyzing TypeScript source files:

```typescript
// TypeScript types are converted to JSON Schema
export class CreateUserDto {
  email: string; // → { "type": "string" }
  age?: number; // → { "type": "number" } (optional)
  roles: string[]; // → { "type": "array", "items": { "type": "string" } }
}
```

### Adding Descriptions with JSDoc

Use JSDoc comments to add descriptions to your schemas:

```typescript
export class CreateUserDto {
  /** User email address */
  email: string;

  /**
   * User age in years
   * @minimum 0
   * @maximum 150
   */
  age?: number;
}
```

### class-validator Integration

If you enable `extractValidation: true`, the library extracts constraints from class-validator decorators:

```typescript
export class CreateUserDto {
  @IsEmail()
  email: string; // → { "type": "string", "format": "email" }

  @Min(0)
  @Max(150)
  age?: number; // → { "type": "number", "minimum": 0, "maximum": 150 }

  @MinLength(1)
  @MaxLength(100)
  name: string; // → { "type": "string", "minLength": 1, "maxLength": 100 }
}
```

See the [Validation Guide](/docs/guides/validation) for details.

### Unsupported DTO Decorators

The following `@nestjs/swagger` property decorators are **not supported**:

- `@ApiProperty()` - Use TypeScript types and JSDoc instead
- `@ApiPropertyOptional()` - Use optional properties (`?`) instead
- `@ApiHideProperty()` - Not supported

## Type Inference

The library infers types from TypeScript when possible:

```typescript
@Controller('users')
export class UsersController {
  // Return type inferred from method signature
  @Get()
  findAll(): Promise<UserDto[]> {
    return this.service.findAll();
  }

  // Parameter types inferred from decorators
  @Get(':id')
  findOne(@Param('id') id: string): Promise<UserDto> {
    return this.service.findOne(id);
  }
}
```

<Callout>
  For best results, always specify explicit return types on controller methods
  and use typed DTOs for request bodies.
</Callout>

## Security Decorators

Security decorators are fully supported at both controller and method level:

```typescript
@Controller('users')
@ApiBearerAuth() // Applied to all methods
export class UsersController {
  @Get()
  findAll() {} // Inherits @ApiBearerAuth

  @Get(':id')
  @ApiOAuth2(['read:users']) // Method-level override
  findOne(@Param('id') id: string) {}

  @Delete(':id')
  @ApiBearerAuth('jwt')
  @ApiSecurity('admin-key') // Multiple schemes (AND logic)
  remove(@Param('id') id: string) {}
}
```

### Supported Security Decorators

| Decorator                     | Default Name | Notes                   |
| ----------------------------- | ------------ | ----------------------- |
| `@ApiBearerAuth(name?)`       | `'bearer'`   | HTTP Bearer (JWT)       |
| `@ApiBasicAuth(name?)`        | `'basic'`    | HTTP Basic auth         |
| `@ApiOAuth2(scopes[], name?)` | `'oauth2'`   | OAuth2 with scopes      |
| `@ApiSecurity(name, scopes?)` | -            | Generic security scheme |
| `@ApiCookieAuth(name?)`       | `'cookie'`   | Cookie-based auth       |

### Behavior

- **Controller-level**: Applies to all methods in the controller
- **Method-level**: Overrides controller-level security
- **Multiple decorators**: AND logic (all schemes required)
- **Merge with config**: Decorator security merges with `openapi.security.global`

<Callout>
  Security schemes must still be defined in config. Decorators reference scheme
  names defined in `openapi.security.schemes`.
</Callout>

See the [Security Guide](/docs/guides/security) for complete configuration options.

## Unsupported Decorators

The following `@nestjs/swagger` decorators are **not currently supported**:

### Response Shortcuts

- `@ApiOkResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 200, ... })`
- `@ApiCreatedResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 201, ... })`
- `@ApiAcceptedResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 202, ... })`
- `@ApiNoContentResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 204, ... })`
- `@ApiBadRequestResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 400, ... })`
- `@ApiUnauthorizedResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 401, ... })`
- `@ApiForbiddenResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 403, ... })`
- `@ApiNotFoundResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 404, ... })`
- `@ApiConflictResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 409, ... })`
- `@ApiInternalServerErrorResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 500, ... })`

### Property Decorators

- `@ApiProperty()` - Use TypeScript types and JSDoc
- `@ApiPropertyOptional()` - Use optional properties (`?`)
- `@ApiHideProperty()` - Not supported

### Other

- `@ApiExtension()` - Custom extensions
- Controller versioning - `@Controller({ path, version })` object syntax

## Next Steps

- [Security Guide](/docs/guides/security) - Configure authentication schemes
- [Validation Guide](/docs/guides/validation) - Extract class-validator constraints
- [Filtering Guide](/docs/guides/filtering) - Exclude endpoints from the spec

Commit message:

Improve OpenAPI module docs and OG metadata (#14)

docs/content/docs/guides/decorators.mdx, after:

---
title: Decorators
description: Supported NestJS and Swagger decorators
---

The generator covers the most common NestJS + Swagger decorators. Schemas come from TypeScript types (not `@ApiProperty`); security schemes are defined in config and decorators add per-operation requirements.

<Callout>
  Quick truth table: we read routing + HTTP method decorators, Swagger
  operation metadata (tags, operation, consumes/produces, ApiResponse),
  parameter descriptions from `@ApiParam`/`@ApiQuery`, and method-level
  exclusion decorators. We ignore property-level Swagger decorators and
  response shortcuts.
</Callout>

For a concise overview, see the [Support Matrix](/docs/guides/support-matrix).

## Routing Decorators

### Controller

```typescript
@Controller('users')
export class UsersController {
  // All routes prefixed with /users
}
```

<Callout type="warn">
  Controller versioning (`@Controller({ path: 'users', version: '1' })`) is not
  currently supported. We only read the string path.
</Callout>

### HTTP Method Decorators

Standard HTTP method decorators are supported:

```typescript
@Controller('users')
export class UsersController {
  @Get()
  findAll() {}

  @Get(':id')
  findOne(@Param('id') id: string) {}

  @Post()
  create(@Body() dto: CreateUserDto) {}

  @Put(':id')
  replace(@Param('id') id: string, @Body() dto: UpdateUserDto) {}

  @Patch(':id')
  update(@Param('id') id: string, @Body() dto: PatchUserDto) {}

  @Delete(':id')
  remove(@Param('id') id: string) {}
}
```

`@Options()` and `@Head()` are also supported. `@All()` is mapped to an `all` operation, which is not a standard OpenAPI method - prefer explicit verbs if you need strict validation.

### Parameter Decorators

```typescript
@Get(':id')
findOne(
  @Param('id') id: string,                    // Path parameter
  @Query('include') include?: string,         // Query parameter
  @Headers('authorization') auth: string,     // Header parameter
) {}

@Post()
create(
  @Body() dto: CreateUserDto,                 // Request body
) {}
```

### Response Status

```typescript
@Post()
@HttpCode(201)
create(@Body() dto: CreateUserDto) {}

@Delete(':id')
@HttpCode(204)
remove(@Param('id') id: string) {}
```

## Swagger Decorators

### `@ApiTags`

Assigns tags to controller endpoints:

```typescript
@ApiTags('users')
@Controller('users')
export class UsersController {
  // All endpoints tagged with 'users'
}

// Multiple tags
@ApiTags('users', 'admin')
@Controller('admin/users')
export class AdminUsersController {}
```

### `@ApiOperation`

Describes an operation:

```typescript
@Get()
@ApiOperation({
  summary: 'List all users',
  description: 'Returns a paginated list of users',
  operationId: 'listUsers',
  deprecated: false,
})
findAll() {}
```

| Property      | OpenAPI Field |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| `summary`     | `summary`     |
| `description` | `description` |
| `operationId` | `operationId` |
| `deprecated`  | `deprecated`  |

### `@ApiParam`

Documents path parameters:

```typescript
@Get(':id')
@ApiParam({
  name: 'id',
  description: 'User ID',
  type: String,
  required: true,
  example: '123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000',
})
findOne(@Param('id') id: string) {}
```

### `@ApiQuery`

Documents query parameters:

```typescript
@Get()
@ApiQuery({
  name: 'page',
  description: 'Page number',
  type: Number,
  required: false,
  example: 1,
})
@ApiQuery({
  name: 'limit',
  description: 'Items per page',
  type: Number,
  required: false,
  example: 10,
})
findAll(
  @Query('page') page?: number,
  @Query('limit') limit?: number,
) {}
```

### Query DTOs

When using `@Query()` without an explicit parameter name, DTO class properties are **expanded into individual query parameters** by default:

```typescript
// DTO definition
class PaginationDto {
  page?: number;
  limit?: number;
}

// Controller
@Get()
findAll(@Query() pagination: PaginationDto) {}

// Generated OpenAPI parameters:
// - page (query, optional)
// - limit (query, optional)
```

This is a common OpenAPI style and works better with code generators. If you prefer to keep the DTO as a single schema reference, set `query.style: "ref"` in your config. See the [Configuration Guide](/docs/guides/configuration#query) for details.

<Callout type="note">
  Explicitly named query params like `@Query('filter') filter: FilterDto` always
  use a schema reference, regardless of the `query.style` setting.
</Callout>

### `@ApiBody`

Documents the request body:

```typescript
@Post()
@ApiBody({
  description: 'User creation data',
  type: CreateUserDto,
  required: true,
})
create(@Body() dto: CreateUserDto) {}
```

### `@ApiResponse`

Documents responses. The `status` property is required and we read `description`, `type`, and array forms (`type: [UserDto]`). Shortcut helpers like `@ApiOkResponse` are not read; use `@ApiResponse` directly.

```typescript
@Get(':id')
@ApiResponse({
  status: 200,
  description: 'User found',
  type: UserDto,
})
@ApiResponse({
  status: 404,
  description: 'User not found',
})
findOne(@Param('id') id: string) {}
```

<Callout type="warn">
  The `status` property is required for `@ApiResponse`. Responses without a
  status are ignored.
</Callout>

### Response Shortcuts

<Callout type="warn">
  Response shortcut decorators (`@ApiOkResponse`, `@ApiCreatedResponse`, etc.)
  are **not currently supported**. Use `@ApiResponse` with an explicit `status`
  property instead.
</Callout>

```typescript
// Instead of @ApiOkResponse({ description: 'Success', type: UserDto })
// Use:
@ApiResponse({ status: 200, description: 'Success', type: UserDto })

// Instead of @ApiCreatedResponse({ description: 'Created', type: UserDto })
// Use:
@ApiResponse({ status: 201, description: 'Created', type: UserDto })

// Instead of @ApiNotFoundResponse({ description: 'Not found' })
// Use:
@ApiResponse({ status: 404, description: 'Not found' })
```

### `@ApiConsumes` and `@ApiProduces`

Specify content types:

```typescript
@Post('upload')
@ApiConsumes('multipart/form-data')
uploadFile(@Body() dto: FileUploadDto) {}

@Get('report')
@ApiProduces('application/pdf')
getReport() {}
```

### `@ApiExcludeEndpoint`

Exclude endpoints from the generated spec:

```typescript
@Get('health')
@ApiExcludeEndpoint()
healthCheck() {}
```

This is controlled by the `excludeDecorators` option:

```typescript
// openapi.config.ts
options: {
  excludeDecorators: ['ApiExcludeEndpoint'],
}
```

`excludeDecorators` matches method decorators only. To exclude an entire controller, apply a decorator to each method or use a path filter.

## DTO Schema Generation

<Callout type="info">
  Schemas are generated from **TypeScript types**, not `@nestjs/swagger`
  decorators. The library uses `ts-json-schema-generator` to analyze your DTO
  classes and interfaces.
</Callout>

### How Schemas Work

The library generates JSON Schema definitions by analyzing TypeScript source files:

```typescript
// TypeScript types are converted to JSON Schema
export class CreateUserDto {
  email: string; // → { "type": "string" }
  age?: number; // → { "type": "number" } (optional)
  roles: string[]; // → { "type": "array", "items": { "type": "string" } }
}
```

### Adding Descriptions with JSDoc

Use JSDoc comments to add descriptions to your schemas:

```typescript
export class CreateUserDto {
  /** User email address */
  email: string;

  /**
   * User age in years
   * @minimum 0
   * @maximum 150
   */
  age?: number;
}
```

### class-validator Integration

If you enable `extractValidation: true`, the library extracts constraints from class-validator decorators:

```typescript
export class CreateUserDto {
  @IsEmail()
  email: string; // → { "type": "string", "format": "email" }

  @Min(0)
  @Max(150)
  age?: number; // → { "type": "number", "minimum": 0, "maximum": 150 }

  @MinLength(1)
  @MaxLength(100)
  name: string; // → { "type": "string", "minLength": 1, "maxLength": 100 }
}
```

See the [Validation Guide](/docs/guides/validation) for details.

### Unsupported DTO Decorators

The following `@nestjs/swagger` property decorators are **not supported**:

- `@ApiProperty()` - Use TypeScript types and JSDoc instead
- `@ApiPropertyOptional()` - Use optional properties (`?`) instead
- `@ApiHideProperty()` - Not supported

## Type Inference

The library infers types from TypeScript when possible:

```typescript
@Controller('users')
export class UsersController {
  // Return type inferred from method signature
  @Get()
  findAll(): Promise<UserDto[]> {
    return this.service.findAll();
  }

  // Parameter types inferred from decorators
  @Get(':id')
  findOne(@Param('id') id: string): Promise<UserDto> {
    return this.service.findOne(id);
  }
}
```

<Callout>
  For best results, always specify explicit return types on controller methods
  and use typed DTOs for request bodies.
</Callout>

## Security Decorators

Security decorators are fully supported at both controller and method level:

```typescript
@Controller('users')
@ApiBearerAuth() // Applied to all methods
export class UsersController {
  @Get()
  findAll() {} // Inherits @ApiBearerAuth

  @Get(':id')
  @ApiOAuth2(['read:users']) // Method-level override
  findOne(@Param('id') id: string) {}

  @Delete(':id')
  @ApiBearerAuth('jwt')
  @ApiSecurity('admin-key') // Multiple schemes (AND logic)
  remove(@Param('id') id: string) {}
}
```

### Supported Security Decorators

| Decorator                     | Default Name | Notes                   |
| ----------------------------- | ------------ | ----------------------- |
| `@ApiBearerAuth(name?)`       | `'bearer'`   | HTTP Bearer (JWT)       |
| `@ApiBasicAuth(name?)`        | `'basic'`    | HTTP Basic auth         |
| `@ApiOAuth2(scopes[], name?)` | `'oauth2'`   | OAuth2 with scopes      |
| `@ApiSecurity(name, scopes?)` | -            | Generic security scheme |
| `@ApiCookieAuth(name?)`       | `'cookie'`   | Cookie-based auth       |

### Behavior

- **Controller-level**: Applies to all methods in the controller
- **Method-level**: Overrides controller-level security
- **Multiple decorators**: AND logic (all schemes required)
- **Merge with config**: Global security from config is merged into per-operation requirements; if both are present, all schemes are required

<Callout>
  Security schemes must still be defined in config. Decorators reference scheme
  names defined in `openapi.security.schemes`.
</Callout>

See the [Security Guide](/docs/guides/security) for complete configuration options.

## Unsupported Decorators

The following `@nestjs/swagger` decorators are **not currently supported**:

### Response Shortcuts

- `@ApiOkResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 200, ... })`
- `@ApiCreatedResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 201, ... })`
- `@ApiAcceptedResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 202, ... })`
- `@ApiNoContentResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 204, ... })`
- `@ApiBadRequestResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 400, ... })`
- `@ApiUnauthorizedResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 401, ... })`
- `@ApiForbiddenResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 403, ... })`
- `@ApiNotFoundResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 404, ... })`
- `@ApiConflictResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 409, ... })`
- `@ApiInternalServerErrorResponse()` - Use `@ApiResponse({ status: 500, ... })`

### Property Decorators

- `@ApiProperty()` - Use TypeScript types and JSDoc
- `@ApiPropertyOptional()` - Use optional properties (`?`)
- `@ApiHideProperty()` - Not supported

### Other

- `@ApiExtension()` - Custom extensions
- Controller versioning - `@Controller({ path, version })` object syntax

## Next Steps

- [Security Guide](/docs/guides/security) - Configure authentication schemes
- [Validation Guide](/docs/guides/validation) - Extract class-validator constraints
- [Filtering Guide](/docs/guides/filtering) - Exclude endpoints from the spec
